# Functional testing


# Intorudction

Unit testing is a great help during the development process. It iwll help us
spot problems introduced by code changes immediately after they have been
introduced. They help test the functionality at the level of individual
functions and methods.

However, to test an entire application that is, e.g., run from the command line
with various parameters, unit tests are not really the right tool. The
literature on software development refers to this type of testing as functional
testing. Tests are more coarse grained, and are likely to take longer to run
than you are comfortable with during an intensive edit/test/commit development
cycle.

Hence it is acceptable to run functional tests less often, for instance only
when a feature has been added to the software, or a bug has been fixed that may
have involved a considerable number of file edits and commits. We rely on unit
testing to ensure that this process didn't break low-level integrity of the
code.

Ideally, functional testing is done automatically for a release with an online
tool such as Travis CI or GitHub Actions for continuous integration.
However, you can also do functional testing locally using, e.g., `shunit2` or
`CTest`.

Functional testing can detect code defects that would go unnoticed by unit
testing, so both testing strategies are complementing one another.



# Functional testing best practices

Unit testing is an invaluable help for the developer since it catches bugs
introduced when the code base changes. Tests can be executed easily and are run
frequently.

However, unit tests typically concentrate on the low level functionality of the
software project. They test whether individual functions behave as expected.
This is white box testing, since the tests are developed with access to the
"innards" of the software under test.

In some circumstances, this may be all that is required, e.g., when developing a
relatively small or very focussed library. In many cases though, unit testing is
best supplemented by functional testing.

The point of view of functional testing is opposite to that of unit testing
since functional tests will focus on the application as a whole.  Are the
results for a sophisticated use case reproduced as expected?  Does the
application's user interface, command line interface (CLI), or graphical user
interface (GUI) behave as expected?  Are options handled as expected?  This is
often called black box testing since only the user interface is accessed.

Functional testing can also be applied to third party applications that are part
of a workflow. For instance, suppose that your application relies on the output
of another application not developed by you. If the output format of that
application changes from one version to the next, running a functional test will
make clear whether there is an impact on your workflow, and you may fix problems
by adapting your application.

The best way to do functional testing is by using a continuous integration
workflow. When the functional tests are run, first a container is prepared with
the required operating system and software stack. Next, your software is built
within the container, so that the environment is completely controlled. If the
build succeeds, tests are run. A report is generated to show failures if they
occur.

Note that it is possible to set up a matrix of operating system versions and
compiler versions to ensure that your code will build and executed cleanly on a
wide range of software platforms.

[Travis CI](https://travis-ci.org/) is a very nice online continuous integration
service that is free to use for open source software projects.

The question remains how to code the actual tests that will be executed by the
continuous integration system. A convenient way is to reuse the unit test
paradigm, but now on the level of the shell. In other words, the unit tests will
be relatively short shell scripts that invoke your application using various
parameters and input data, and verify the results.

The [shunit2 framework](https://github.com/kward/shunit2) provides a nice
framework for this purpose. It provides similar functionality as the unit
testing frameworks for specific programming languages. However, from the point
of view of the software project this is black box, rather than white box
testing.

The same concerns as for unit testing apply. For instance, it is important that
the tests cover the use cases as well as possible. Here too, code coverage can
be a great help to detect which application aspects are tested, and for which
additional tests need to be implemented to improve the coverage.

We will illustrate the use of shunit2 for functional testing in this section.
Full continuous integration is a bit out of scope of this course.
